<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>Crisis management&lt;/span&gt;&lt;/p&gt;
&lt;p class=&quot;p1&quot;&gt;&lt;span class=&quot;s1&quot;&gt;</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-section-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-section">
<h2 class="bordered-title" id="doc30">CRISIS MANAGEMENT</h2>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<div class="sub-headed-section">
<h4 class="sub-heading" id="doc31">COVID-19</h4>

<p>Imagine you were climbing a huge mountain that has never been explored before. From your starting location it was imposible to tell which slopes can be passed and which can’t. It was also clear thet most of the terrain is hidden behind the slopes and covered in forest. Your climb involved routes tried and abounded, there was backtracking and traversing. Many of the successful decisions you made were pure luck! Eventually you managed to climb the mountain and make it to the summit. </p>

<p>When looking down from the summit you can scan all of the terrain, but it is covered in forest. That makes it imposible to see all of the possible routes, the few good ones or the best route. If you want to check a possible new route you have to climb the mountain again!</p>

<p>The way we remember things after an event is different than the way we know during the event. When pressed to explain how you managed to the top you pretend the route you took was indeed the best one. If we learn retrospectively it always implies causality. With the benefit of hindsight you declare that you simply chose that route through your logical judgment. It is a lie of course because it completely misrepresents the process by which you processed to the summit. That’s only human - we rewrite the past to form a narrative which replaces luck and experimentation with conscious intent. This is called retrospective coherence. It means that, in hindsight, it's easy to explain why things happened, yet it is impossible to predict them ahead of time. Hence it cannot be used to act in the present </p>

<p>OK, but we have to act in the present Covid-19 pandemic! Governments should be responsible for protecting their citizens so they must take action. But what actions should they take?</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>As of April 5, 2020, the debate about what to do is limited to two major alternative opinions . Do nothing and let the virus run its course or use unpopular methods to quarantine and restrict the movement of citizens within and across city and national borders. Let’s look at them as presented in the media.</p>

<p>First opinion insist on listening to the experts. The experts want to make a rational decision based on a logical process backed with reliable data. And what the experts say? Тhe data we have is unreliable….Human beings fear what they do not understand and that fear causes them to behave in irrational and destructive ways.….When there is talk about how the virus works there needs to be actual math behind the statements and peer reviewed materials….Lockdown means we shall watch the entire world commit economic suicide for no good reason.….The government should stand back and let the private sector take care of the problem.….We have no problem with a strong central government response as long as it is reasonable and wise….OK, many people will die with coronavirus, but this does not mean that they died of it….The authorities may have distorted the figures….It might appear far more of a killer than flu, simply because of the way deaths are recorded. This, of course, explains why such an overwhelming number of Covid-19 deaths involve so-called ‘underlying conditions’, in fact serious, often fatal, diseases….Since there is no reliable data and the models don’t work if we don’t know what will happen we shouldn’t do anything extraordinary and wait for “herd immunity” to build instead. </p>

<p>The second opinion is to take the safest possible position. What those voices say? ….We are not against collecting more and better data, but decisions can’t wait. ..Only historians have good data…Decisions must be iterated as more is learned….Only idiots wait for data in a crisis….By the time you have data it’s too late….We have neither the means nor the time to accumulate such data right now, when decisions must be made….It is like telling a surgeon with his finger on a massive bleeder he needs lab tests before deciding what to do….Models are only as good as your assumptions….Let’s test and find out! If we had 125 cases 14 days ago and 5000 today then it grew 40 times during that period….Certainly we have more unknown cases….The modelling forecasts huge impact on health services. These levels of demand would be completely unprecedented….Knowing our government we would consider one or two orders of magnitude more cases than anything reported by them….The idea, advanced by some doctors and politicians, that social distancing is costing the economy too much is a “fake trade-off.. The only way to truly help the economy is by snuffing out the pandemic….We can't wait! Getting more evidence doesn't helps, it hurts… In dealing with tail events, the most important move is the first move….Timing is everything….We shouldn't take a certain action without good evidence from data, but not taking that action is also a decision that requires evidence….In the real world, one must reduce risk in the absence of reliable data, via the most robust to perturbations model….Forgetting models for a moment if we overreact against catastrophic exponential scenarios we can take a wait-and-see approach, but if we under-react, it will be too late….In the real world decisions are normally made with insufficient and flawed data…We cannot wait for evidence when people's life are at stake.</p>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<div class="sub-headed-section">
<h4 class="sub-heading" id="doc32">CYNEFINN AS A LENS</h4>

<p>Let’s use Cynefinn as a lens to look at the two alternative opinions.. Our goal is to confirm our perceptions with the reality in order to act. </p>

<p>First, what is the Cynefin domain humans perceive we are in?</p>

<p>The first group thinks we have to turn to our experts for advice about which good practice to follow. This is a perception of a complicated situation </p>

<p>The second group thinks we are in uncharted waters. In order to avoid chaos we have to act and our responce has to coevolve with the situation. We have no valid model how the virus will spread and how many people will die. Everything is possible! This is a perception of a chaotic situation. </p>

<p>Second, what is the objective reality? As with any virus if not restrained somehow the number of Covid-19 infected people will grow exponentially. The virus will mutate and there will be some attempts to restrain the spread of infection so the virus and the human population will coevolve. From Cynefin perspective when we hear the term “coevolve” we must acknowledge we are in a complex system.</p>

<p>Waiting for more data is not the way to approach complex, dynamic problems. The chaos and complexity domains are not the domains for experts. Experts flourish in the complicated domain. </p>

<p>In such a chaotic situation we have to act, then sense the results and respond accordingly. Speed trumps perfection. </p>

<p>At the same tim ewe should never forget thet the danger in a crisis is premature convergence on a single solution and approach. .The ability to be decisive while holding many options open is a key leadership ability in a crisis.</p>

<p>When taking action we should be differentiating dynamics that we can't affect vs ones we can We can't keep planets from colliding, but we can keep diseases from exploding just by modifying our behavior. Many governments treat the pandemic as if it is an external force on the system that we must respond to proportionally: as it gets worse we slowly ramp up defensive measures in response to the scale of the force. But it's not an external force, it is an endogenously generated one, and because we grow this force through our behavior, the slow ramping of mitigation guarantees the expenditure of many more resources across a much longer cycle. Instead we should nip it in the bud. </p>

<p>That’s why the action that could be taken is quite straightforward and already done in the history of mankind. It is to isolate, to separate the population in small groups and wait for the virus to die out by itself. After all the virus doesn’t walk by itself it is spread by the people! Its extreme version is to lockdown regios, cities, even countries. It is clear that with isolation the spread of the virus slows down. </p>

<p>Some caution is in order here - if we put rigid constraints which make no sense to people they will not be obeyed. For instance if we say one can get out of their home provided they meet no one, compared to the constraint one can leave their house only when the government sends them a text message.</p>

<p>Quarantine is to reduce the number of infected and not to prevent infection. That is a complex technique, Chaotic situation becomes complex when we start see patterns.</p>

<p>For complex problems the role of decision makers is to create and relax constraints as needed and then dynamically allocate resources where patterns of success emerge. Examples of constraints are the heuristics: “wear a mask” and “don’t touch your face and mouth”. We manage what we could manage – the boundary conditions, the safe-to-fail experiments, rapid amplification and dampening. By using this approach, we discover value at points along the way. Practices that work in containing the infection should be the result of exaptation. Exaptation is when under condition of stress s thing developed for one function is re-purposed for a different function.</p>

<p>Nobody will ever know if the Stay-At-Home orders worked...or didn’t. Nor to what extent. That’s how complexity works. You can’t know how things might else have been. </p>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<div class="sub-headed-section">
<h4 class="sub-heading" id="doc33">UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES</h4>

<p>We know that with complex systems whatever we do will produce unintended consequences. The bigger the intervention the bigger the unintended consequences. Let’s look at some possibilities.</p>

<p>First, the public is presented with diagrams where the number of infections grows “exponentially”. That particular diagram must have been familiar to every person signing a loan with compound interest. Maybe one of the unexpected second-order effect from this crisis would be people start looking back into the usury question? </p>

<p>Second, there may be unintended consequences of fear and stress on behaviour caused by regulations without reassurance as to consequences. </p>

<p>Third is about the consequences for the decision makers. Obviously the lockdowns are the way governments globally take. There are voices who will want the governments to report after the pandemic is over if the measures taken were the right ones. What if the final numbers of dead are way bellow the flu? The pubic will say that it had been fooled that we have averted something that was never really going to be as severe as we feared. Obviously the governments will say that this is because their repressive economy-wrecking measures worked. The public will demand proof, after a thorough independent inquiry, that this is true. For, if it is not then we are in a danger of the first global political crisis.</p>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<div class="sub-headed-section">
<h4 class="sub-heading" id="doc34">CONCLUSION</h4>

<p>Globalisation is a reason enough to anticipate a “very strange acute virus spreading throughout the planet.” Calling it black swan allows leaders to excuse not being prepared. This year’s COVID-19 virus was a predictable event.</p>

<p>Covid-19 is a wakeup call for the human race. Thanks God it is not a severe decease! So actually we’ve got a chance to find new ways of living and working together. Iit will not be the last pandemic. </p>

<p>Once you have had that thought, it is impossible to believe that we can return to the pre-virus world. Everything we do, all of our investments, and the way we organize ourselves will be influenced by consideration of whether we are protected from COVID-19 and its successors or made more vulnerable to them.</p>

<p>As a first step toward confronting the outbreaks to come, we must learn to live with uncertainty, rather than allowing ourselves to be held captive by it. The organisations should switch to a different mode of operating. They have to abandon the annual plans and quarterly targets and instead pay full attention to the situation as it unfolds and adjust their behavior accordingly. It’s a skill and capacity that we urgently need today. In other words, our attention and intention need to quickly align with what is actually happening in the present. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
</div>

</body>
</html>
