<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>Intro</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-section-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-section">
<h2 class="bordered-title" id="doc1">INTRO</h2>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>CYNEFIN, PRONOUNCED “KUH-nev-in”, is a Welsh word that signifies the multiple factors in our environment and our experience that influence us in ways we can never understand[snowden_leader_2007].</p>

<p>The Cynefin framework is a sense-making framework. Sense-making is the way we humans choose between multiple possible explanations of sensory and other input as we seek to confirm our perceptions with the reality in order to act in such a way as to determine or respond to the world around us [snowden_multiontology_2005]. In other words: how do we make sense of the world so that we can act in it? With that comes the concept of sufficiency: how do we know enough so that we can act? </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>The two key principles of pragmatic and successful sense-making are:</p>

<p>1. Any sense-making model must be able to be drawn on the back of a table napkin from memory. If we can’t do that it would have little utility in our day-to-day decision making. If it has little impact on our day-to-day decision making it will have no impact on our strategy. Huge models are designed to create a dependency on the model creator [snowden_table_2015].</p>

<p>2. Any information or visualization which needs to lead to action must be instantly understood without secondary interpretation. When the decision makers have to have the data interpreted for them all sorts of problem come into place. The more interpretive layers there are, the more likely we’d miss things we need to pay attention to and the more hidden assumptions we’d have. We need to remove the mediating levels between the decision maker and the raw data - this is called disintermediation [snowden_disintermediation_2016]. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>Cynefin is a decision support framework. We can use Cynefin strategically and operationally. It is a discourse mechanism which combines strategy and operations and recognizes ontological diversity. .Cynefin was designed as a conflict resolution framework as much as for understanding decision making[snowden_liminal_2019]. Cynefin allows us to have a differentiating conversation. It helps us see things from different perspectives. It creates a shared language which allows people to understand each other at different levels and between different functions in an organization [snowden_fractality_2015] The language we would use determines what we would do. The language we use to describe a situation should enable us to know what to do about the situation. If the language of description or analysis is different from the language of action, we have introduced a mediation layer..</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>There is a British phrase – “horses for courses”. It means that different race horses run differently on different grounds. So if we go to a wet ground we bet on a different horse than on a dry ground. It’s used to say that it is important to choose suitable people for particular activities because everyone has different skills.</p>

<p>The Cynefin idea is: once we understand the nature of the system we will take a different approach for discovery and intervention/action. Different approaches work in different contexts. To use a philosophical term – ontology determines epistemology. </p>

<p>In general people try to apply one universal approach in a situation where different contexts require different solutions to be applied. The problem with things like Six Sigma is that they come with an ontological assumption, rather than with an ontological discovery so they impose a wrong universal model. .All such techniques try to impose universality. </p>

<p>One of the unique things about Cynefin and a key principle is: we are not saying the traditional techniques are wrong and we can’t use them. We actually say they are right in the proper context and its boundaries. There is nothing wrong with best practices in a rigidly constrained system. There is everything wrong with best practices outside a rigidly constrained systems. There is nothing wrong with doing experimental probes within a complex system. There is everything wrong on spending money on probes if we’ve got a rigidly constrained system. To say: everything is complex, is as foolish as to say: everything is ordered. It’s to fail to recognize the unique aspects of human systems. Human beings have learned how to create constraints to produce predictability and that’s actually part for our success.</p>

<p>Cynefin is about cognitive efficiency and recognition of diversity without argument. If we agree in which domain we are in, we immediately move into some type of action. We know where to look when things are shifting. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
</div>

</body>
</html>
